Page 2
Naunihal Children’s Home for Girls is a Children’s Home run by Prerana to
provide shelter to girl children in need of care and protection.
3
It is located in the Raigad district of Maharashtra, India and thus
falls under the jurisdiction of the CWC, Raigad
Primarily, the resident girls living in Naunihal (and such other similar Shelter/
Children’s Homes) are the ultimate beneficiaries of this note.
The Superintendents of such Children’s Homes, Counsellors, Social Case
Workers, Probation Officers, Child Welfare Officers are expected to be the
primary users of this note
Page 3
routinely the child steps out of Naunihal to attend her study classes and/or
vocational training program and comes back to Naunihal. Only children who are
over the age of 15 attend such educational and/or vocational courses
unaccompanied by caregivers from Naunihal. It is to be assumed that a CNCP
attends any educational and/or vocational training program after approval has
been obtained from the concerned CWC.
Orienting the child
with these safety tips is not to curb the child’s right to freedom, but to equip
the child in becoming self-reliant, and thus truly, free.
This information is to be
shared with the child by any of the following functionaries: Counselor,
Superintendent, Child Welfare Officer or Caseworker, or the Probation Officer.
Page 4
The prior approval obtained from the CWC is only for the child to
attend her college and/or vocational training program, and return
to Naunihal. Ensure the child understands this too.
Inform the child that if there is any other outing she is required to or wishes to
attend; she should inform the Superintendent or Case Worker at Naunihal in
advance. The necessary permission for the same will then be sought from the
respective CWC. The child going for any such outing without explicit approval
from the CWC is not permitted
Ensure that the child is aware of the practice of reporting to the staff before
leaving and after returning to Naunihal.
Inculcate in the child, a habit of checking her belongings before leaving
Naunihal. One shouldn’t leave Naunihal without emergency money,
sanitary napkins, meal box, water bottle, personal medicines, if any, etc.
Inform the child that if she is likely to return later than her usual time, she
should contact the Superintendent or any staff of Naunihal and share the reason
for the delay from her college/training center. Explore possible situations with
the child, like if she faces any obstacles like a traffic jam, etc., she should take the
help of a fellow passenger to call and inform the staff at Naunihal the reason for
the delay. Discuss with the child that how these measures are to ensure the staff
at Naunihal is informed that the child is safe, and the reasons for the delay – and
they do not report the matter to authorities fearing a breach of the child’s
safety.
The child should be well informed that if she feels unwell while
traveling, she should call Naunihal or request someone to call Naunihal
so that a staff member could reach out to her to pick her up
Ensure that the child is well-versed with the route which is to be taken
by the child and discuss the same in detail with the child. Go over the
route multiple times, accompany the child, till she understands it
thoroughly
Page 5
There are certain tips for the child to keep in mind while she is traveling on her
own. The caregivers are expected to inform the child of the same. Some of them
are listed as follows:
Inform the child not to get into a crowded bus/train as it is unsafe and
risky. Wait for the next bus to arrive.
Inform the child to always carry the correct railway pass/ticket.
The child should be asked to not travel on the footboard, lean out of a
running train, or cross the railway tracks. Always use the footbridge to
change platforms.
In trains, the child should preferably travel by compartments reserved for
women. On buses, she should make use of seats reserved for ladies. While
using facilities in public spaces like bathrooms, etc. – the child should avoid
common facilities and use those reserved for females only. The concept of
reservation for her safety and convenience should be discussed with the
child.
Educate the child about road traffic safety. The child should follow the
traffic rules and road safety regulations. She should check the traffic signals
before crossing the street, look out for any approaching vehicles, and use
the zebra crossing wherever available.
Brief the child to follow the route discussed with the Naunihal staff. The
child should make use of the usual path. The child should be informed to
take a busy and well-lit road, and the dangers of taking short-cuts and
unknown routes should be discussed with the child.
Prepare the child to be attentive to her surroundings, her belongings and
the people around her
Inform the child to be aware of anyone in a car/taxi/ auto rickshaw/vehicle
who stops to talk to her or ask her for directions if she is walking down the
street, even if it is a familiar neighborhood. Discuss instances like
maintaining distance from the car and never getting into the car — even if
the stranger is going in the same direction that the child is headed, or the
stranger says there is an emergency or a disaster along the way
Explain to the child that while getting into a taxi, she should ensure that the
child lock of the doors isn’t activated
Instruct the child to cross the street if she feels like she is being followed,
and notice if the person following her does the same. If this happens, the
child should start running immediately. Develop an understanding in the
child that there is no harm in running, and there is no need to wait till the
person is very close to take action
Page 6
Inform the child that any incidents of being followed, being teased or troubled
should be reported to Naunihal staff immediately, even if it is a hunch. Discuss
with the child that it is never her fault if any such situation arises
Under any circumstances, no form of sexual maltreatment is ever alright. Have
regular conversations with children with regard to personal safety
Explain to the child that if someone makes an attempt to grab her purse or bag,
then at that moment, it is advisable to let it go. Fighting in order to resist it could
result in the risk of getting hurt. Money and other possessions likely to be lost in
such situations can be later recovered or replaced. The harm caused to the child
may be irreversible. Inform the child that she must run away raise an alarm and
seek help. She should not refrain from asking for help if there is a feeling of being
in trouble or danger.
Help can always be sought at the nearest police station. Discuss police stations
falling in the child’s route with the child if there are any. Educate the child about
the Railway Protection Force and the possibility of seeking help from them at
railway stations. Make the child aware that she can also approach a store in a
nearby mall, a supermarket, or a well-lit, family restaurant.
Ensure that the child memorizes some important toll-free and such
other emergency phone /helpline numbers e.g. of Naunihal, the
police, Childline Helpline number, etc.
Discuss with the child the benefit of yelling when in trouble, as it is a
Discuss with the child the benefit of yellin
good way to seek attention from passers-by
Cultivate an understanding in the child that it is unsafe to leave food and drinks
unattended at any point. The child should not accept anything to eat or drink
from a stranger. Discuss with children how consuming unattended/already
opened food and beverages is harmful as the food or drink can be spiked with
drugs causing intoxication, etc.
Inform the child that she should not trust a stranger who follows her around and
won’t leave her alone sometimes despite telling him to. This also amounts to
stalking. The child should be made aware that if anyone hastens the child to
immediately leave with him or her on the grounds of a disaster like fire,
earthquake, etc. she should not leave with the said person – but call Naunihal
immediately and take their advice
Page 7
Initiate a discussion with the child on the importance of trusting an individual
after obtaining information about the person and the situation. The child must
understand that not all strangers are rude or forceful right away. It is important
to be aware of strangers, both men and women, who seem nice — the ones who
make conversation easily and get important information without the person
realizing it
Educate the child that she is not obligated to share any personal information with
any person. If a stranger or a nominally familiar person discloses his or her
personal information, it doesn’t mean the child is obligated to share similar
information about herself with him/her.
Discuss with the child about consent. Inform her that there is nothing wrong with
sounding ‘rude’ and saying NO if the person continues to pressurize or bother
her. Saying NO is the child’s right, and it is a complete sentence without requiring
any further elaboration or justification.
This document does not contain tips on practicing safety in the digital space, especially with
mobile phones – as children below 18 years who are living in Naunihal are not given personal
cell phones.
