Page 3
hildren living in street situations has been a reality because
of lack of collective and concerted efforts by the civil society
organizations, law enforcement agencies, juvenile justice authorities and
concerned departments, and also due to lack of convergence and
application of laws pertaining to children.
Page 10
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE (SOP) FOR CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN
IN STREET SITUATIONS
Introduction: SOP 2.0
Constitutional provisions for children, provided under the Constitution of India, are affected/contravened
when a child is found in street situations. These provisions are as follows
1. Article 14: The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the
laws within the territory of India.
2. Article 15(3): Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for
women and children.
3. Article 21: No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure
established by law.
4. Article 21(A): The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to
fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.
5. Article 23(1): Traffic in human beings and beggary and other similar forms of forced labour are
prohibited and any contravention of this provision shall be an offence punishable in accordance with
law.
6. Article 24: No child below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in any factory or mine
or engaged in any other hazardous employment.
Page 11
7. Article 38(1): The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as
effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the
institutions of the national life.
8. Article 39: The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing…(e)…the tender age of
children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter avocations
unsuited to their age or strength.
9. Article 39(f):…[C]hildren are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in
conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and
against moral and material abandonment.
10. Article 45 :The State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children
until they complete the age of six years.".
While the UNCRC makes no particular reference to CiSS, all its provisions are
applicable to them, as are its optional protocols.
in CRC’s General Comment No. 21 (2017) on
children in street situations, the CRC underlined the wishes of children in street situations, offers key
observations on the population, and makes recommendations for States based on a child rights framework.
The NPAC, 2016, of the Ministry of Women and Child Development (MoWCD), takes into account the current
priorities for children in India. The focus of the NPAC is to reach and serve to the “Last Child First”, as they
are most vulnerable due to gender, socio-cultural and economic or geographic exclusion, including other
vulnerable children, such as CiSS, children of migrant workers, children of sex workers and those suffering
from HIV/AIDS or other diseases.
Page 12
Rationale of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) :
JJ Act defines a child in need of care and protection as: “who is found working in
contravention of labour laws for the time being in force or is found begging or living on the street”. Thus,
CiSS fall under the category of CNCP.
when we talk about CiSS in the context of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), goals like “No
Poverty”(SDG No. 1), “Zero Hunger”(SDG No.2”, “Good Health and Well Being”(SDG No. 3), “Quality
Education”(SDG No. 4) and “Clean Water and Sanitation”(SDG No. 6) have been hardly addressed.
“Standard Operating Procedure for Care and Protection of Children in Street Situations 2.0” is an
endeavour to strengthen the processes and interventions regarding CiSS in the view that there should not be
any child in a street situation; rather, they should be with their families
It is pertinent to mention that Principle XII of
the JJ Act, 2015 stresses further upon the need to understand that institutionalization of these children should
be assumed as the last resort and that every effort shall be inclined towards keeping the child with his/her
biological parent or guardian and institutionalization of such CNCP shall be opted for only after exhausting all
other available options.
this SOP has been developed based on the learning of the NCPCR while dealing with matters
under several domains, including children in conflict with law and CNCP under JJ Act, 2015, rescue of child
labour under Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 2016, health and mental health, including
substance abuse, and Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009,as well as the
implementation of the earlier SOP for the years 2018 and 2019 in four States by Save the Children.
Save the Children mapped about 2 lakhs children in 10 cities of four States in India, namely, Delhi,
Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, whose rights to protection, education, health, water, sanitation,
and urban development and welfare were not addressed so far.
Page 14
Life of Children Living in Street Situations (CiSS): Some Issues and Concerns
The 2018 report of NCRB says that in percentage terms, major
crime heads under “Crime against Children” during 2018 were kidnapping and abduction (44.2%); and cases
under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, 2012 were 34.7%, including child rape.
The crime rate per lakh children population was 31.8% in 2018 in comparison to28.9% in 2017.
proportion of older girls (those in 16–18 years age group) in the street child
population is comparatively low as per the data collected by Save the Children, which suggests that various
factors drive girls out of streets as they grow older. It could be child marriage, trafficking or entry into the
brothels. However, there is a need to conduct an in-depth study on this.
some of the reasons
why a child leaves the house are: “family breakdown, divorce, step parenting, domestic violence, beating,
rebuke, lack of community support, breakdown of support networks, lack of parental education about child
care and development, conflict in family and stress management skills by the parents; assorted family
problems including abuse, desire for consumer goods, the lure of the city”, etc., leading the child to the streets
Rag-picking is the most commonly cited livelihood option of CiSS. Other survival strategies are begging,
hawking/street vending and working at roadside stalls. Most street-connected children have to work daily.
Long working hours, drudgery and exhaustion are the reasons for these children to get attracted to drugs. A
substantial proportion of the children spend a part of their earnings on drugs and intoxicants. Being on the
street also gives them easy access to drugs, alcohol and tobacco, hence substance abuse is a major problem
that these children are prone to.
According to a study conducted by the NCPCR with National Drug
Page 15
Dependence Treatment Centre, the common drugs of use among children and adolescents are tobacco and
alcohol, followed by inhalants and cannabis. The mean age of onset was lowest for tobacco (12.3 years),
followed by onset of inhalants (12.4 years), cannabis (13.4 years) and alcohol (13.6 years), proceeding to the
use of harder substances—opium, pharmaceutical opioids, heroin (14.3–14.9 years)—and other substances
through injecting route (15.1 years).
In another study, 46.36% of slum-dwelling adolescents used both
smokeless and smoking tobacco, in addition to alcohol and cannabis, and started using drugs during their
childhood itself.
Further, a study brought out by the ASSOCHAM Ladies League on “Situational Analysis of
Street Children in Metro Cities”, covering 2,000 children, reveals that children in metros are victims of one or
other substance use, including inhalants (35%), alcohol (12%), cannabis (16%), chewing tobacco and gutka
(16%) and smoking (21%).
Diarrhoea/loose motions, viral fever and
food poisoning are common illnesses that are caused and aggravated by consumption of unsafe drinking water,
lack of personal hygiene and open defecation. Most CiSS depend on public sources of water. This includes tap
water, hand pumps, wells and water sources at parks, bus stands and railway stations. The CiSS are often
more vulnerable to sexual and reproductive health problems, sexually transmitted diseases, HIV/AIDS,
unwanted pregnancies and unsafe abortions. It has been seen that sexual and reproductive health problems
affect both girls and boys. In addition, the CiSS have a number of psychological problems due to insecurity,
and continued anxiety, violation and maladjusted behaviour throughout their lives.
Most of the children do not have any identification document, such as birth certificates, and other caste-related
or family income certificates, which is the biggest hindrance for children and families in availing benefits of
education and other social welfare schemes.
Page 16
The term “street child”, used by the Commission on Human Rights in 1994, was developed in the 1980s to
describe “any girl or boy...for whom the street (in the broadest sense of the word, including unoccupied
dwellings, wasteland, etc.) has become his or her habitual abode and/or source of livelihood, and who is
inadequately protected, supervised or directed by responsible adults.”
At that time, “street children” were
categorized as: children on the street, who worked on the street and went home to their families at night;
children of the street, who lived on the street, were functionally without family support but maintained family
links; or abandoned children who lived completely on their own.
The terminology has continued to evolve to recognize children as social actors whose lives are not
circumscribed by the street. Human Rights Council Resolution 16/12 refers to children working and/or living
on the street, and the Committee on the Rights of the Child has adopted the term “CiSS”, recognizing that
children engage in numerous activities on the street and that if there is a “problem”, it is not the child but
rather the situations in which s/he finds her/himself.
Definition of Child in Need of Care and Protection
Section 2(14) of the JJ Act, 2015defines child in need of care and protection as a child:
(i) who is found without any home or settled place of abode and without any ostensible means of
subsistence; or
(ii) who is found working in contravention of labour laws for the time being in force or is found
begging, or living on the street; or
(iii) who resides with a person (whether a guardian of the child or not) and such person—
(a) has injured, exploited, abused or neglected the child or has violated any other law for
the time being in force meant for the protection of child; or
(b) has threatened to kill, injure, exploit or abuse the child and there is a reasonable
likelihood of the threat being carried out; or
(c) has killed, abused, neglected or exploited some other child or children and there is a
reasonable likelihood of the child in question being killed, abused, exploited or neglected
by that person; or
(iv) who is mentally ill or mentally or physically challenged or suffering from terminal or
incurable disease, having no one to support or look after or having parents or guardians unfit to
take care, if found so by the Board or the Committee; or
(v) who has a parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is found to be unfit or
incapacitated, by the Committee or the Board, to care for and protect the safety and well-being of
the child; or
(vi) who does not have parents and no one is willing to take care of, or whose parents have
abandoned or surrendered him; or
(vii) who is missing or run away child, or whose parents cannot be found after making
reasonable inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed; or
(viii) who has been or is being or is likely to be abused, tortured or exploited for the purpose of
sexual abuse or illegal acts; or
Page 17
(ix) who is found vulnerable and is likely to be inducted into drug abuse or trafficking; or
(x) who is being or is likely to be abused for unconscionable gains; or
(xi) who is child of or affected by any armed conflict, civil unrest or natural calamity; or
(xii) who is at imminent risk of marriage before attaining the age of marriage and whose parents,
family members, guardian and any other persons are likely to be responsible for solemnization of
such marriage.
Categorization of Children for Appropriate Interventions
the CiSS may be categorized under three broad types as
follows:
1. Children without support living on the streets all alone:
2. Children stay on the streets in the day and are back home in the night with their families who reside in a
nearby slum/hutments:
3. Children living on the streets with their families:
Page 19
POSSIBLE SCENARIO WHEN A CHILD IS PRODUCED BEFORE THE CWC
Page 20
Procedures to be Followed to Ensure Care and Protection of CiSS
Production of Child before the CWC
The principle adopted and reflected in JJ Act, 2015, that any child/children who come under the category of
CNCP is to be produced before the CWC, is established under Section 27 of the Act.
According to JJ Act, 2015, Section 31(1):
Any child in need of care and protection may be produced before the Committee by any of the
following persons, namely:—
(i)any police officer or special juvenile police unit or a designated Child Welfare
Police Officer or any officer of District Child Protection Unit or inspector appointed
under any labour law for the time being in force.[This definition is expanded to include
the “police beat officer/constable” in urban areas and, as a measure of gatekeeping, can
include the chowkidar in the rural set-up. It also includes the Railway Police in this
version of the SOP.]
(ii)any public servant;
(iii) Childline Services, or any voluntary or Non-Governmental Organization or any
agency as may be recognized by the State Government;
(iv) Child Welfare Officer or probation officer;
(v)any social worker or a public spirited citizen; or
(vi) by the child himself; or
(vii) any nurse, doctor or management of a nursing home, hospital or maternity home,
Provided that the child shall be produced before the Committee without any loss of time
but within a period of twenty-four hours excluding the time necessary for the journey.
Page 21
Information, Preparation and Reporting
1. Anybody, including a spirited citizen, Childline, Child Welfare Police Officer (CWPO), District
Child Protection Unit (DCPU), inspector appointed under labour laws, police, social worker, public
servant, Child Welfare Officer (CWO), Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) official, nurse,
doctor or management of hospital, workers in their official capacity or personal capacity as a spirited
citizen having information of CiSS can produce a child before the concerned CWC, as provided under
Section 31(1), or can share the information with Childline-1098 for the same purpose.
2. As provided under Section 30(xii) of the JJ Act, 2015,CWChaving information on CiSS under their
jurisdiction may reach out to these children(as they are in need of care and protection), who are
otherwise not produced before the Committee, with the decision by at least three members.
3. Based on information for the purpose of producing before the CWC and rehabilitation of CiSS,
statutory bodies, like NCPCR, SCPCRs and district child protection mechanism, can constitute teams
for conducting survey or adopt any other means to collect information/data on CiSS and carryout
rescue operation within the ecosystem created by JJ Act, 2015, as well as other applicable acts and
provisions. The concerned CWC must be informed of such operation, which is to be carried out in
consultation with the CWC.
4. As provided under Section 31 regarding a public spirited citizen, it may be mentioned that Article 51
of the Constitution of India prescribes the fundamental duties of a citizen to strive towards excellence
in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of
endeavour and achievement. Accordingly, in the context of CiSS, all spirited citizens having
information on such children should bring to the notice of police or inform Childline-1098 service for
producing the child before CWC to ensure its care and protection.
5. In case of a rescue effort, if the number of children rescued is more and transportation/movement isa
problem, the CWC may reach out (instead of waiting for the children to be reported to them) to the
children so as to ensure their suitable placement.
Production of the Child before CWC and Initial Process
Inquiry about the Children Produced to CWC
circumstances under which the child was found/ contacted, and the whereabouts of the family.
In Case the Child is Alone in the Street Situation
social investigation report (SIR),
exercise its discretion for
the restoration of the child to parents or guardian under Section 37(1 and 1[b]), Section 39(1) and Section
40(3), Section 37 (1.h) of the JJ Act, 2015.
Page 22
the child may be
provided long-term institutional care till the completion of 18 years and after that, financial support (as per
Section 46 of JJ Act, 2015) may be provided till the age of 21 years in order to facilitate the child’s re
integration into the mainstream of society.
In Case the Child is Living with his Family in the Street Situation
the DCPU may visit the family and prepare the SIR to present
the family situation.
It is also important that the family is counselled by DCPU/CWO/social
worker/NGO/community-based organization (CBO) representative to explain to them the various reasons why
the child should not be on the streets.
If the family
want to go back to their native place
all possible steps may be taken to rehabilitate the family to their native place.
CWC may consider writing to the CWC of the concerned district the family
belongs to, or to the District Magistrate, to provide sponsorship for the child - if the child is eligible for
sponsorship under Section 45 of the JJ Act and ensure basic facility and appropriate benefits under various
schemes of the Government
(i) at the native place, the Village Level Child Protection Committee (VLCPC),with the panchayat, should also
help the family to access the benefits under the Government schemes;
(ii) VLCPC/school management committee (SMC)/local body should ensure that the child is enrolled in
Anganwadi or school; and
(iii) CWC may assign or request a local NGO/CBO for further support to the child, as per need, and to carry
out family strengthening programme (the details of scheme are provided in Annexure).
the family is unable to go back to their native
home
CWC shall
recommend for the child is to be enrolled at the Anganwadi Centre or in a school, as well as provide open
shelter facility available in the area.
The CWC shall also recommend that the family may be provided night shelter or “Rain Basera” in the area
by the urban local body (ULB) or district administration as per the administrative jurisdiction.
In case CWC views that the family is unduly (without any circumstances
which are beyond their control) engaging their child for begging or cause for begging with criminal or
professional intent, legal action may be initiated against such parents as per provisions provided under Section
76,“Employment of child for begging” (JJ Act, 2015).
CWC may assess the family and if it is found
that such parent or guardian is unfit or incapacitated to take care for and protect the safety and well-being of
the child, the child may be sent to institutional care as a last resort, after sufficient inquiry
Page 23
CWC doubts that the guardians or family actually are not biological parents or
guardians, it shall request for further police investigation to find out the truth, with a copy to Anti Human
Trafficking Unit (AHTU)/SCPCR.
if the child mentions that he/she is controlled by any other
person or group of persons, the police is to carry out further investigation into the matter and suitable action
under JJ Act, 2015 shall be initiated immediately.
the restoration of the child to parents or guardian under Section 37(1 and 1[b]), Section 39(1) and Section 40(3)
of the JJ Act, 2015
The CWC may also appropriately initiate process of declaring a child legally free for adoption
under Section 38 of the JJ Act, 2015.
If it is found that the child is on the street during the day time and goes back to the family in the evening that
stays in a nearby slum/hutment area, the child is to be enrolled for education and nutrition either in a school or
Anganwadi Centre depending on his age.
In addition, the child should attend an open shelter in order to use the free time,
rather than be on the street. It may be mentioned that an open shelter shall function as a community-based
facility for children, with the objective of protecting them from abuse or weaning them, or keeping them, away
from a life on the streets.
In case there is no facility of an open shelter, as per provision provided under Section 51 of the JJ Act, 2015,
CWC, in consultation with the District Magistrate, shall recognize a facility being run by a Government
organization, or a voluntary or Non-Government Organization or a school building as a fit facility for the time
being to run an open shelter for such children till the facility of a permanent open shelter starts
In Case the Child is Working
It may be noted that as per the
W.P.(CRL) No. 2069/2005 filed by Save the Childhood Foundation, the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi, in its
judgment dated 5 November 2014, has mentioned that “all enforcement agencies should understand Child
Labour as meaning the system of employing or engaging a child to provide labour or service to any person, for
any payment or benefit, paid to the child or to any other person exercising control over the said child”.
Page 24
Section 77
of the JJ Act, 2015 that states: “Whoever gives, or causes to be given, to any child any intoxicating liquor or
any narcotic drug or tobacco products or psychotropic substance, shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to a fine which may extend
up to one lakh rupees.
action may be initiated under Section 77 of the JJ Act, 2015 for giving narcotics and
also, to be tried under POCSO Act for sexual offence.
Page 25
Child Beggars: Children Begging on Streets are a Major Category of Children Living in Street
Situations
Under the Bombay
Prevention of Begging Act, 1959,“begging” means:
(a)Soliciting or receiving alms, in a public place whether or not under any pretence such as
singing, dancing, fortune telling, performing or offering any article for sale;
(b)entering on any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms;
(c)exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound
injury, deformity of diseases whether of a human being or animal;
(d)having no visible means of subsistence and wandering, about or remaining in any public
place in such condition or manner, as makes it likely that the person doing so exist [sic] soliciting
or receiving alms;
(e)allowing oneself to be used as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms;
but does not include soliciting or receiving money or food or given for a purpose authorizes [sic]
by any law, or authorized in the manner prescribed by (the Deputy Commissioner or such other
officer as be specified in this behalf by the Chief Commissioner).
Page 27
7.Suggested Procedures Regarding Aadhaar Card for CISS
Special measures for issuance of Aadhaar number to certain category of persons is dealt with in Section
5:“The Authority shall take special measures to issue Aadhaar number to women, children, senior citizens,
persons with disability, unskilled and un-organised workers, nomadic tribes or to such other persons who do
not have any permanent dwelling house and such other categories of individuals as may be specified by
regulations.”
Children belonging to the families who live in slums/hutments: Aadhaar card may be made as per
records and documents available of their families.
2. Children who have no family and are in long-term care at the children home: Aadhaar card may be
made as per provision of the Aadhaar Act.
3. Children of migrant labour living on streets: Aadhaar card may be made as per records and documents
available of their families.
4. Children who have no document, the documents of the family would be valid.
5. The matter pertaining to Aadhaar card for the street families may be decided by the Competent
Authority, as provided under the Aadhaar Act, 2016 and ruling of Hon’ble Supreme Court on W.P.
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012, connected to “Aadhaar card”, dated 26 September 2018.
6. Biometric verification may be made mandatory for every child found alone or if CWC has
apprehension that the guardian/family of the child may not be biological.
7. Possibility for age determination test and issuing of birth certificate/age certificate and Aadhaar card
for such children so that they can be linked with public distribution system (PDS) and other social
protection schemes.
Page 28
Suggested Measures to Deal with Various Categories of CiSS
Table 1: If the Child is Alone in Street Situation
S.No. Interventions/MeasuresHowWho
1Production of child before
CWC.Any person having information
about CiSS or who comes across a
child in street situation can produce
the child before the CWC, with or
without the help of Childline,
juvenile police, CWO or any NGO.As provided under Section 31
of JJ Act, 2015, any person or
statutory bodies,like
NCPCR, SCPCRs and district
child protection mechanism, or
any team formed by them for
the purpose of care and
protection of CiSS.
2 Temporary shelter.On the order of CWC, suitable
temporary shelter to be provided to
the child.DCPU and the organization
running open shelter identified
by the DCPU.
3Social investigation report
(SIR).DCPU would conduct social
investigation through conversation
and counselling of the child.DCPU
4 Counsellingand
identification of the child
using Aadhaar technology.On the order/request of CWC,
child shall be taken to a nearby
Aadhaar Seva Kendra.By police, DCPU/CWO.
5 Counselling and restoration
of the child who has family
outside the city and CWC
initiatesprocessfor
restoration with his family.On the order of CWC, the child
would be restored with his parents
or guardian or family, with
supervision of the CWC or social
workers.By DCPU/social worker;
female police/constable in case
of a girl child.
6 Child who could not be
repatriated, full-term care
with ICP till 18 years of
age for him/her; and
rehabilitation and social
integration from age 18 to
–21 years.CWC may also
appropriatelyinitiate
process to declare a child
legally free for adoption
under Section 38 of the JJ
Act, 2015 for full-term
care.CWC may order for placement of
the child into a children’s home or
fit facility/placement of the child
with fit person with or without
sponsorship or in a foster care with
ICP.DCPU on the order of CWC.
Page 29
Table 2: If Child has No Family or No Link with the Family or Family Who are Incapacitated
S.No. Interventions/MeasuresHowWho
1Production of child before CWC. Any person having
information about CiSS or
who comes across a child
in street situation can
produce the child before
the CWC, with or without
the help of Childline,
juvenile police, CWO or
any NGO.As provided under Section 31 of JJ
Act, 2015, any person or statutory
bodies, like NCPCR, SCPCRs and
district child protection mechanism,
or any team formed by them for the
purpose of care and protection of
CiSS.
2Temporary shelter.On the order of CWC,
suitable temporary shelter
to be provided to the child.DCPU and organization running
open shelter identified by the
DCPU.
3Social investigation of the family. The CWO would conduct
socialinvestigation
through conversation and
counselling of the child.DCPU
4 Counselling and identification of
the child using Aadhaar
TechnologyOn the order/request of
CWC, child shall be taken
to a nearby Aadhaar Seva
Kendra.By police, DCPU/CWO.
5If child has no family or family
could not be traced, full-term care
with ICP till 18 years of age; and
rehabilitationandsocial
integration from age 18–21 years.CWC may order for
placement of the child into
a children’s home or fit
facility/placement of the
child with fit person with
or without sponsorship or
in a foster care.CWC may
also appropriately initiate
process of declaring a child
legally free for adoption
under Section 38 of the JJ
Act, 2015.DCPU on the order of CWC.
6If a child has a parent or guardian
and such parent or guardian is
found to be unfit or incapacitated
to take care for and protect the
safety and well-being of the child,
the child may be sent for full-term
care with ICP till 18 years of age;
and rehabilitation and social
integration from age 18 to 21
years.CWC may declare the
family as incapacitated and
order for placement of the
child into a children’s
home.
Efforts can be made to
send back the child after
interim and temporary
support services. CWC
may also explore the
suitability and eligibility
for sponsorship under
Section 45 of JJ Act, 2015DCPU and organization running
children’s home identified by the
DCPU.
Page 30
Table 3: If the Child has Family that Lives in the Nearby Slum/Hutment
S.No. Interventions/MeasuresHowWho
1Production of child before
CWC.Any person having information about
CiSS or who comes across a child in street
situation can produce the child before the
CWC, with or without the help of
Childline, juvenile police, CWO or any
NGO.As provided under Section
31 of JJ Act, 2015, any
person or statutory bodies,
like NCPCR, SCPCRs and
district child protection
mechanism, or any team
formed by them for the
purpose of care and
protection of CiSS.
2Family counselling.On the order of CWC, the DCPU/CWO
would visit the family staying in the
nearby slum/hutment for counselling.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
3Social investigation of the
family.On the order of CWC, during the visits to
the family, CWO would prepare the SIR.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
4Enrolment of the child in
school or Anganwadi
Centre/crèches.In case the child is not enrolled, on the
order of CWC, DCPU/CWO to identify
school or Anganwadi/crèches in the area
for admission as per the age of the child.
Education department must be informed
about the child/children for their
enrolment and education.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
5Enrolment in open shelter
available in the area.To refrain the child to be on street, on the
order of CWC, the child may be enrolled
in an open shelter available in the area. In
case there is no open shelter available,
DCPU, with district administration, to
identify and declare a fit facility as open
shelter.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
6Individual care plan (ICP) On the order of CWC, ICP may be
prepared for all such children by visiting
their houses.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
7Familystrengthening
with schemes as per
findings of SIR.CWC on the basis of SIR would request
the district administration to provide
benefits under different schemes. DCPU
would follow up with the district
administration.CWC, district administration,
DCPU.
Page 31
Table 4: If the Child Belongs to Parents Who are Seasonal Migrants and Live on the Streets
S.No.Interventions/MeasuresHowWho
1Production of child before
CWC.Any person having information about
CiSS or who comes across a child in
street situation can produce the child
before the CWC, with or without the
help of Childline, juvenile police,
CWO or any NGO.As provided under Section 31 of
JJ Act, 2015, any person or
statutory bodies, like NCPCR,
SCPCRs and district child
protection mechanism, or any
team formed by them for the
purpose of care and protection
of CiSS.
2Family counselling.On the order of CWC, the
DCPU/CWO would visit the family
staying on the street for counselling.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
3Social investigation of the
family.On the order of CWC, during the
visit to the family, CWO would
prepare the SIR.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
4 Children to be enrolled in
school or Anganwadi
CentreIn case the child is not enrolled, on
the order of CWC, DCPU/CWO to
identify school or Anganwadi/
crèches in the area for admission as
per the age of the child. Provision of
bridge course also to be made for the
child for learning as per the age.
Education department must be
informed about the child and such
children for their enrolment and
education.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
5Enrolment in open shelter
available in the area.To refrain the child to be on street, on
the order of CWC, the child may be
enrolled in the open shelter available
in the area.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
6 CWC may request district
administration to ensure
shelter/accommodation to
beprovided bytheir
employers as per labour
laws imposed in the time
being. Or family may be
provided night shelter/Rain
Basera in the city.CWC, as per the area of jurisdiction
or administrative arrangement, would
request the district administration or
municipal corporation to take
appropriate steps in providing
shelter/accommodation to the family
through the employer of the family or
make available night shelter/Rain
Basera in the city for the family.District
administration/municipal
corporation (ULB).
Page 32
Table 5: Children Living on the Street and Begging with their Parents or Parents Do Any Other Odd
Jobs and Cause their Children to Beg
S.No.Interventions/MeasuresHowWho
1Production of child before CWC. Any person having information
about CiSS or who comes across a
child in street situation can
produce the child before the
CWC, with or without the help of
Childline, juvenile police, CWO
or any NGO.As provided under Section 31
of JJ Act, 2015, any person or
statutory bodies,like
NCPCR, SCPCRs and district
child protection mechanism,
or any team formed by them
for the purpose of care and
protection of CiSS.
2 Counselling of the family.On the order of CWC, the
DCPU/CWO would visit the
family staying on the street.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
3Social investigation of the
family.On the order of CWC, during the
visit to the family, CWO would
prepare the SIR.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on children
protection issues in the area).
4 Children to be enrolled in school
or Anganwadi CentreIn case the child is not enrolled,
on the order of CWC,
DCPU/CWO to identify school or
Anganwadi /crèches in the area
for admission as per the age of the
child. Provision of bridge course
also to be made for the child for
learning as per the age. Education
department must be informed
about the child and such children
for their enrolment and education.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
5 Counselling of the family,
however, in case the CWC views
that the family is unduly (without
any circumstances which are
beyond their control) engaging
their child for begging or cause
for begging; action may be
initiated against such family as
per provision provided under
Section 76 of JJ Act, 2015,
“Employment of child for
begging”,and Section 75 of JJ
Act,“ Cruelty to child”.In case the CWC, on the basis of
SIR, found that without any
circumstances which are beyond
the control of the family, the child
is being engaged for begging or
cause for begging, CWC would
request the police to start legal
process against the family.CWC, DCPU, local police.
6Temporary shelter to the child
for the time being and if needed,
full-term care with ICP till 18
years of age; and rehabilitation
and social integration from age
18 to 21 years.On the order of CWC, temporary
shelter may be provided in an
open shelter for the time being
and if needed, CWC may order
for placement of the child into a
children’s home orfit
facility/placement of the child
with fit person with or without
sponsorship or in a foster care till
the completion of 18 years.DCPU
Page 33
Table 6: In Case Child is Begging on the Street
S.No.Interventions/MeasuresHowWho
1Production of child before CWC. Any person with or without the
help of Childline, juvenile
police, CWO or any NGO can
produce CiSS before the CWC.As provided under Section 31
of JJ Act, 2015,any person
orstatutory bodies,like
NCPCR, SCPCRs and district
child protection mechanism,
or any team formed by them
for the purpose of care and
protection of CiSS.
2In case child has parents/guardians
who also beg or live on streets.DCPU to visit the family for
preparing SIR.DCPU
(may take the help of NGOs
working on child protection
issues in the area).
3Inquiry of the child to understand
the circumstances under which the
child is begging.CWC would enquire to
understand the circumstances
of the child under which he/she
is begging.CWC, DCPU.
4In casethe child has
parents/guardians,inquiry to
understand the circumstances why
the child is being made to beg on
the streets.
(i) In case the family is found to
be unfit or incapacitated to take
care for and protect the safety
and well-being of the child, the
child may be sent to an
institutional care.
(ii) CWC may use its discretion to
write to police for investigation
to take legal action against
persons for engaging the child
in begging as per provision
provided under Section 76 of
the JJ Act, 2015.On the order of CWC, DCPU
to provide institutional care to
the child till such time the
parents are capable of taking
care of the child or till the
completion of 18 years.CWC, DCPU, local police.
Page 34
Table 7: If the Child Belongs to Parents Who Live on Streets, Do Odd Jobs and Sell Goods on the
Streets
S.No.Interventions/MeasuresHowWho
1Production before the CWC.Any person with or without the
help of Childline, juvenile police,
CWO or any NGO can produce
CiSS before the CWC.As provided under Section
31 of JJ Act, 2015, any
person orstatutory bodies,
like NCPCR, SCPCRs
and districtchild
protection mechanism, or
any team formed by them
for the purpose of care and
protection of CiSS.
2Family counselling.On the order of CWC, the
DCPU/CWO would visit the
family staying in the nearby
slum/hutment for counselling.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of
NGOs working on
children protection issues
in the area).
3Social investigation of the family. On the order of CWC, during the
visit to the family, CWO would
prepare the SIR.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of
NGOs working on child
protection issues in the
area).
4If the family agreed to go back to
their native place, CWC, in the best
interests of the child write to the
CWC and District Magistrate of
the native district of the child for
repatriation and to provide
benefits*under schemes of central
and State Government. Admission
of the child in school or in an
Anganwadi.Based on SIR and best interests of
the child, CWC may request the
District Magistrate of the native
district for repatriation and to
provide benefits of the schemes.
CWC will also share the ICP of the
child. Child has to be enrolled in
school or in an Anganwadi Centre
at his native place.District Magistrate of the
nativedistrict,
DCPU/local Panchayati
Raj Institutions (PRIs) to
do the follow up;
school/Anganwadi Centre.
5If the family is unable to go to their
native place, night shelter/Rain
Basera may be provided.CWC, as per the area of
jurisdiction or administrative
arrangement, would request the
district administration or municipal
corporation to take appropriate
stepstoprovide
shelter/accommodation to the
family at a night shelter/Rain
Basera in the city.Districtadministration/
municipalcorporation
(ULB), DCPU.
Page 35
Table 8: If the Child has Family that Lives on the Street or in Public Places, including Railway Premises
S.No.Interventions/MeasuresHowWho
1Production before the CWC.Any person with or without
the help of Childline,
juvenile police, CWO or any
NGO can produce CiSS
before the CWC.As provided under
Section 31 of JJ Act,
2015,any person or
statutory bodies,like
NCPCR, SCPCRs and
district child protection
mechanism, or any team
formed by them for the
purpose of care and
protection of CiSS.
2Family counselling.On the order of CWC, the
DCPU/CWO would visit the
family staying in the nearby
slum/hutmentfor
counselling.DCPU /CWO
(may take the help of
NGOs working on
children protection issues
in the area).
3Social investigation of the family.On the order of CWC, during
the visit to the family, CWO
would prepare the SIR.DCPU/CWO
(may take the help of
NGOs working on child
protection issues in the
area).
4If the family wants to go back to their
native place in the best interests of the
child, CWC, in the best interests of the
child write to the CWC and District
Magistrate of the native district of the
child for repatriation and to provide
benefits of the schemes as per SIR.Based on SIR and best
interests of the child, the
CWC may request the
District Magistrate of the
native district for repatriation
and to provide benefits of the
schemes.District Magistrate of the
nativedistrict,
DCPU/local PRIs to do
the follow up.
5Enrolment of the child in school or
Angnwadi.Child is to be enrolled in
school or in an Anganwadi
Centre.DCPU,
school/Anganwadi
Centre.
6Following facilities to be provided till the
repatriation is not done:
(i) Temporary shelter/open shelter—
day and night/Rain Basera to the
family with access to food/ration.
(ii) Enrolment of the child in
school/Anganwadi.
(iii)Enrolment of the child in open
shelter.CWC, as per the area of
jurisdiction or administrative
arrangement, would request
the ULB or district
administration to take
appropriatestepsin
providing shelter/ accommo
dation to the family at a night
shelter/Rain Basera in the
city.
DCPU would identify the
school/Anganwadi and open
shelter in the area for
enrolment.Municipalcorporation
(ULB)/district
administration, DCPU
Page 36
Table 9: Waste-/Rag-picking Child
S.No.Interventions/MeasuresHowWho
1Production before CWC.Any person with or without the
help of Childline, juvenile
police, CWO or any NGO can
produce CiSS before the CWC.As provided under Section
31 of JJ Act, 2015,any
person orstatutory bodies,
like NCPCR, SCPCRs and
district child protection
mechanism, or any team
formed by them for the
purpose of care and
protection of CiSS.
2 Counselling and inquiry of the child. Child would be counselled by
DCPU, CWO and inquiry by
CWC.DCPU, CWO, CWC.
3(i)Firstinformation report
(FIR) against the employer under
contravention of the Child and
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and
Regulation) Act, 1986.
(ii) Wages from the employers.
(iii) Compensation under the
ruling of the Supreme Court of India
in the judgment of M.C. Mehta vs
State of Tamil Nadu and Others,
AIR 1997 SC 699.
(iv)If the child is found to be
a bonded labour, compensation
in accordance with Clause 5 of
the Central Sector Scheme for
Rehabilitation of Bonded
Labourer, 2016.The DCPU would support the
local police in registering the
FIR. CWC would recommend
for the wages from the
employer and compensation
under the Supreme Court ruling
and the compensation under
Central Sector Scheme of
Rehabilitation of Bonded
Labourer, 2016.DCPU/local police, CWC,
labour department.
4 Restoration with the family or
temporary shelter to the child.On the order of CWC,
restoration of the child with the
family by DCPU or open
shelter to be provided to the
child.DCPU
5In case of no family restoration of
the child, the child may be sent for
full-term care with ICP till 18 years
of age; and rehabilitation and social
integration from age 18 to 21.CWC may order for placement
of the child into a children’s
home or fit facility/placement
of the child with fit person with
or without sponsorship or in a
foster care.CWC can also
appropriately declare a child
legally free for adoption under
Section 38 of the JJ Act, 2015.CWC, DCPU, organization
running children’s home.
Page 37
Table 10: Child Victim of Substance Abuse
S.No. Interventions/MeasuresHowWho
1Production before CWC.Any person with or without the help
of Childline, juvenile police, CWO
or any NGO can produce CiSS
before the CWC.As provided under Section
31 of JJ Act, 2015,any
person orstatutory bodies,
like NCPCR, SCPCRs and
district child protection
mechanism, or any team
formed by them for the
purpose of care and
protection of CiSS.
2 Counselling and inquiry of the
child.On the order of CWC, the
counsellor would counsel the child
and get information about the
substance abuse habit of the child
and from where he gets it.DCPU, counsellor.
3Shelter to the child in a fit
facility.On the order of CWC, the child to
be sent to a fit facility appropriate to
his/her condition.DCPU, District Social
Welfare Officer (DSWO),
4 CWC may request police to
investigate or take action against
the person/shop selling narcotic
substance under Section 77 of the
JJ Act, 2015.On the request of the CWC, police
would investigate the matter and
take suitable legal action.Local police.
Page 38
Table 11: If the Child is Divyang
If in any of the given circumstances, the child living in streets is a Divyang, then along with the appropriate
measures as suggested in Table 1-10, following specific interventions/measures shall be taken
S.No.Interventions/MeasuresHowWho
1Production before CWC.Any person with or without the
help of Childline, juvenile police,
CWO or any NGO can produce
CiSS before the CWC.As provided under
Section 31 of JJ Act,
2015,anyperson
orstatutory bodies, like
NCPCR, SCPCRs and
district child protection
mechanism, or any team
formed by them for the
purpose of care and
protection of CiSS.
2 Divyang certificate to the child.On the order of CWC, Chief
Medical Officer (CMO) of the
district to issue the certificate
appropriate to the case.CMO, DCPU.
3Pension scheme.On the basis of certificate, divyang
child to be enrolled for pension
scheme benefit.CMO, DCPU,DSWO
4 Assistive devices/aids(to be
provided through CMO).On the order of CWC, required
medical supportive devices to be
provided to the child.CMO, DCPU to follow
up.
5 Appropriate institutional care in case
the child does not have a family.CWC, on the nature of disability
of the child, would order for the
placement in an appropriate
institutional care. DCPU will
follow up with DSWO to place the
child in the institution. Effort
would also be made for their
restoration and reintegration to the
mainstream society through
appropriate meansand
interventions.DSWO, DCPU
Page 39
.Social Rehabilitation of CiSS and Family Strengthening
Table 12- A: Child Protection and Child-centric Provisions, Schemes and Programmes
S.N Scheme/ProgrammeMinistryPurpose
1 AadhaarMinistry of Electronics
andInformation
Technology (MoE&IT)Aadhaar number is a 12-digit random
number issued by the UIDAI to the residents
of India after satisfying the verification
process laid down by the Authority. Any
individual, irrespective of age and gender,
who is a resident of India, may voluntarily
enroll to obtain Aadhaar number. Person
willing to enroll has to provide minimal
demographic and biometric information
during the enrolment process, which is
totally free of cost.
2Production before
CWCsAs per JJ Act, 2015,
with its Model Rules,
2017, Child Protection
Scheme, MoWCDAs per Section 31(1) of the JJ Act, 2015:Any
child in need of care and protection may be
produced before the Committee by any of
the following persons, namely:—
(i) any police officer or special juvenile
police unit or a designated Child Welfare
Police Officer or any officer of District Child
Protection Unit or inspector appointed under
any labour law for the time being in force;
(ii) any public servant;
(iii) Childline Services or any voluntary or
Non-Governmental Organisation or any
agency as may be recognised by the State
Government; (iv) Child Welfare Officer or
probation officer;
(v) any social worker or a public spirited
citizen;
(vi) by the child himself; or
(vii) any nurse, doctor or management of a
nursing home, hospital or maternity home:
Provided that the child shall be produced
before the Committee without any loss of
time but within a period of twenty-four hours
excluding the time necessary for the journey.
3Fostercare under
Section44 of JJ Act, 2015JJ Act, 2015, Child
Protection Scheme,
MoWCDThe children in need of care and protection
[CNCP] maybe placed in foster care,
including group foster care for their care
and protection through orders of the
Page 40
Committee [CWC], after following the
procedure as may be prescribed in this
regard, in a family which does not include
the child’s biological or adoptive parents
or in an unrelated family recognized as
suitable for the purpose by the State
Government, for a short or extended period
of time.
4Sponsorship of children
under Section 45(1 and
2) of JJ Act, 2015Child Protection
Scheme, Ministry of
Women and Child
Development(1)The State Government shall make rules
for the purpose of undertaking various
programmes of sponsorship of children,
such as individualto individual
sponsorship, group sponsorship or
community sponsorship.
(2) The criteria for sponsorship shall
include—
(i) where mother is a widow or
divorced or abandoned by family;
(ii)where children are orphan and are
living with the extended family;
(iii) where parents are victims of life
threatening disease;
(iv) where parents are incapacitated due
to accident and unable to take care of
children both financially and
physically.
(3) The duration of sponsorship shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(4) The sponsorship programme may
provide supplementary supportto
families, to Children’s Homes and to
special homes to meet medical,
nutritional, educational and other needs
of the children, with a view to improving
their quality of life.
5Specialized adoption
agency under Section 65
of JJ Act, 2015JJ Act, 2015, Child
Protection Scheme,
MoWCDAn institution established by the State
Government or by a voluntary or Non
Governmental Organization for housing
orphans, abandoned and surrendered
children placed there by the order of
CWC.
6 Open shelter under
Section43(1) of JJ Act,
2015JJ Act, 2015, Child
Protection Scheme,
MoWCDA facility for children, established and
maintained by the State Government,
either by itself or through a voluntary or
Non-Governmental Organization, that
functions as a community-based facility
Page 41
for children in need of residential support,
on short-term basis, with the objective of
protecting them from abuse or weaning
them, or keeping them, away from a life
on street.
7 Children’s home under
Section 50 of JJ Act,
2015JJ Act, 2015, Child
Protection Scheme,
MoWCDA children’s home is established or
maintained, in every district or group of
districts, by the State Government, either
by itself or through a voluntary NGO, for
the placement of children in need of care
and protection for their care, treatment,
education, training, development and
rehabilitation.
8After care under
Section 46 of JJ Act, 2015Central Government
Act, JJ Act, 2015After-care organization: The State
Government may, by rules made under this
Act, provide—
(a) for the establishment or recognition
of after-care organisations and the
functions that may be performed by
them under this Act;
(b) for a scheme of after-care
programme to be followed by such
after-care organisations for the purpose
of taking care of juveniles or the
children after they leave special homes,
children homes and for the purpose of
enabling them to lead an honest,
industrious and useful life.
9RTE Act, 2009 &Mid
Day MealMinistry of Education-Free and Compulsory Education to the
children from 6 years to 14 years.
- Special Training Centre (STC) for out of
school children : Special Training for out of
school children as provided under Section 4
of the RTE Act that makes specific provision
for Special Training for age appropriate
admission of out of school children.
-One meal to the students
- National Institute of Open Schooling
NIOS provides a number of Vocational, Life
Enrichment and community oriented courses
besides General and Academic Courses at
Secondary and Senior Secondary level. It
also offers Elementary level Courses through
its Open Basic Education Programmes .
Page 42
10RBSKMinistry of Health &
Family Welfare –
NationalHealth
MissionRashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK)
is an initiative aiming at early identification
and early intervention for children from birth
to 18 years to cover 4 ‘D’s viz. Defects at
birth, Deficiencies, Diseases, Development
delays including disability. Early detection
and management diseasesincluding
deficiencies bring added value in preventing
these conditions to progress to its more
severe and debilitating form and thereby
reducing hospitalization and improving
implementation of Right to Education.
11Scheme for Adolescent
Girls (SAG)Ministry of Women &
Child Development –
under ICDS umbrella
SchemeA package of services that is given to
adolescent girls is as follows:- i. Nutrition
provision ii. Iron and Folic Acid (IFA)
supplementation iii. Health check-up and
Referral services iv. Nutrition & Health
Education (NHE) v. Mainstreaming out of
school girls to join formal schooling, bridge
course/skill training vi. Life Skill Education,
home management,etc.vii.
Counseling/Guidance on accessing public
services
12NationalScholarship
SchemesMinistry of Minority
Affairs (MoMA)y
1. Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme for
Minorities: The scholarship at pre-matric
level will encourage parents from minority
communities to send their school-going
children to school, lighten their financial
burden on school education and sustain their
efforts to support their children to complete
school education. The scheme will form the
foundation for their educational attainment
and provide a level playing field in the
competitiveemploymentarena.
Empowerment through education, which is
one of the objectives of this scheme, has the
potential to lead to upliftment of the socio
economic conditions of the minority
communities.
2. Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme:
The objective of the scheme is to award
scholarshipsto meritorious students
belonging to economically weaker sections
of minority community so as to provide them
better opportunities for higher education,
Page 43
increase their rate of attainment in higher
education and enhance their employability.
13 NationalScholarship
SchemesMinistry of Social
Justiceand
Empowerment
(MoSJ&E)Pre-Matric Scholarship for Students with
Disabilities
14 Scholarship SchemesMinistry of Labour and
Employment (MoL&E)Financial Assistance for Education of the
Wards of Beedi/Cine/IOMC/LSDM Workers:
Post-Matric and Pre-Matric
(i) Scheme for Award of Financial
Assistance for Education (Scholarship) to
the Children of Beedi Workers
(ii) Scheme for Award of Financial
Assistance for Education (Scholarship) to
the Children of Iron Ore, Manganese Ore
&Chrome Ore Mine (IOMC) Workers
(iii) Scheme for Award of Financial
Assistance for Education(Scholarship)
to the Children of Limestone
&Dolomite Mine (LSDM)Workers
(iv) Scheme for Award of Financial
Assistance for Education (Scholarship) to
the Children of Cine Workers
15 National Child Labour
Project(NCLP)MoL&EThe objective of this project is to eliminate
child labour in hazardous industries. Under
this scheme, the target group is all children
below 14 years of age who are working in
occupations and processes listed in the
Schedule to the Child Labour (Prohibition
and Regulation) Act, 1986 or occupations
and processes that are harmful to the health
of the child.
16 Central Sector Scheme for
Rehabilitation of Bonded
Labourer,
2016MoL&EThis is a Central Sector Scheme which
came into effect from 17 May 2016.
(i) The State Governments are not
required to pay any matching
contribution for the purpose of cash
rehabilitation assistance.
(ii) The Rehabilitation package is
Rs.1,00,000/- per adult male
beneficiary. Beneficiary shall have the
option to either deposit it in an annuity
scheme or receive cash grant. The
District Administration will assess the
cash requirement of the beneficiary and
exercise its best judgment in the matter
and put the money under annuity
scheme with the consent of the said
adult male.
Page 44
(iii) For special category beneficiaries
such as children including orphans or
those rescued from organised and
forced begging rings or other forms of
forced child labour, and women, the
amount of rehabilitation assistance
shall be Rs2 lakhs out of which at least
Rs1,25,000/- shall be deposited in an
annuity scheme in the name of each
beneficiary and the balance amount
shall be transferred to the beneficiary
account through ECS [Electronic
Clearing Service].
(v) In cases of bonded or forced labour
involving extreme cases of
deprivation or marginalization such
as transgender, or women or
children rescued from ostensible
sexual exploitation such as brothels,
massage parlours, placement
agencies etc., or trafficking, or in
cases of differently-abled persons,
or in situations where the District
Magistrate deems fit,the
rehabilitation assistance shall be 3
lakhs at least.
17 Crèches under Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee
Act (MGNREGA)Ministry of Rural
Development (MoRD)Through this Act, people belonging to the
rural areas of India are given an
employment opportunity up to 130 days in
a financial year for their families.
MGNREGA provides a number of legal
entitlements to rural workers through a
series of provisions in the law, including
crèches for the children of women
workers at the worksites.
18 UjjwalaMoWCDA Comprehensive Scheme for Prevention
of Trafficking and Rescue, Rehabilitation
and Re-integration of Victims of Trafficking
for Commercial Sexual Exploitation
19 NALSA
(Victims of Trafficking
and Commercial Sexual
Exploitation)Scheme,
2015Ministry of Law andy
Justice (MoL&J)The objective of the scheme is to
provide legal services to address the
concerns of victims of trafficking,
including women of all age groups and
at every stage, i.e., prevention, rescue
and rehabilitation.
The thrust of the scheme is to provide
economic and social pathways for these
Page 45
marginalized groups so that they are
socially included, and thus get all social
protections available to an ordinary
citizen. The interventions of the legal
services authorities should be to ensure
the protection of the dignity of the
victims, which is as much their
fundamental right to a life as of any
other citizen.
To ensure that the already marginalized
voluntary sex workers are not excluded
from the assistance of the legal services
authorities, they are also considered
victims of commercialsexual
exploitation, apart from those children
and adults who are trafficked for the
purpose.
The District Legal Services Authority
(DLSA), with support of the concerned
department, could facilitate the
applicant to fulfill the procedure
stipulated under each scheme and
comply with all the due diligence
processes. This would include enabling
the applicant to get supportive
documents that are required to be
furnished in order to establish eligibility
for the benefits under any scheme, such
as getting proof of residence and age
certificate. Once all the due diligence is
over and the scheme sanctioned, DLSA
should provide supportto the
community till the scheme gets
delivered or the benefit reaches the
beneficiary.
The available schemes are:
1. Integrated Child Development
Scheme(ICDS)orchildcare
development:0–6 years, pregnant
women and lactating mothers (as
caregivers);
2. Food security or ration cards;
Social security or pension for the
elderly women; and
3. educational schemes, including mid
day meal, bridge schools, residential
schools of Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan,
scholarships for primary, secondary
and higher education, etc.
Page 46
20 Pradhan Mantri Kaushal
Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)Ministry of Skill
Developmentand
Entrepreneurship
(MoSD&E)To provide encouragement to youth for
development of employable skills by
providing monetary rewards by
recognition of prior learning or by
undergoing training at affiliated centres
