Page 3
This article reviews the impact of institu
tionalization on the following areas of child
development: physical development; develop
mental milestones, intellectual development,
and academic achievement; behavior prob
lems; indiscriminate friendliness; and attach
ment.
Evidence on the persistence of or
changes in the behavior, its relation to length
of institutionalization, and its correlates are
also presented.
Page 4
Such interventions included pro
viding sensory stimulation (Broussard & De
carie, 1971), placing infants as “houseguests”
with older residents (Skodak & Skeels, 1945,
1949), and improving child to caregiver ratios
(Hunt, Mohandessi, Ghodessi, & Akiyama,
1976). All of these studies showed that simple
changes within the orphanage environment
creased children’s developmental competence.
Further support for the idea that institution
alized children were not destined for develo
mental compromise came from the work of
Barbara Tizard and her colleagues with chil
dren who had spent the first 2 years of their
lives in high-quality institutions in the United
Kingdom (Tizard, 1977).
In these institutions
the child to caregiver ratios were 3:1 and the
were taken on outings, and were fed well.
The major way in which orphanage children’s
lives differed from the lives of home-reared
children was that caregivers were discouraged
from forming intimate relationships with them
(Tizard & Tizard, 1971). Tizard and Joseph
(1970) first assessed children in the institution
when they were 2 years old and compared
them to a sample of home-reared children
from a working class background. They found
that the institution children’s IQ scores were
only slightly lower than those of the working
class children and that their language was
only slightly delayed. At age 4.5 the mean IQ
of the children in an institution was in the
erage range and no language problems were
found (Tizard & Rees, 1974).
Hodges and
Tizard (1989) reported that children adopted
from the institution had normal IQs at 8 and
16 years of age. Tizard’s findings were more
positive than the findings of the earlier
search, but it is important to note that the ch
dren in Tizard’s sample had not experienced
the extreme deprivation experienced by earlier
samples of children (e.g., Goldfarb, 1945a
Page 5
velopment (Bayley, 1969), Kaler and Free
man (1994) found that none of the orphanage
children were functioning at their age level
Dennis (1973) followed
and 20 of the 25 children functioned at levels
children from a Lebanese orphanage after they
that were less than half their chronological
were adopted and compared the developmen
age.
tal outcomes of children adopted at differen
ages. He claimed that children who had been
adopted before 2 years of age eventually re-
Similarly, Carlson and
gained normal IQs whereas those who were
Earls (1997) reported that a group of 2- to 9
adopted after 2 years of age showed perma-
month-old infants in a Romanian orphanage
nent deficits in IQ. Although this claim has
scored well below the Bayley norms for their
often been cited, it has not been adequately
age.
tested.
Sloutsky (1997), who assessed
differences in IQ scores between 6- to 7-year
old children reared in a Russian orphanage
and children of the same age reared at home
and found that the orphanage children scored
lower in IQ than home-reared children
Other researchers have been able to evalu
ate the intellectual development of previously
institutionalized Romanian children after the
Both sets of literature clearly
profound intervention of adoption. These two
demonstrate that institutionalization early in
projects, which are ongoing and have now fo
life has a negative impact on intellectual de-
lowed children up to 8 or more years after
velopment and that it is not only institutional
adoption, have provided the clearest informa
ization but also the length of institutionaliza
tion we have regarding intellectual develop
tion that is important.
ment in postinstitutionalized children.
The first
Most of the recent information we have
project, in British Columbia, Canada, com
concerning the impact of institutionalization
prised an initial sample of 46 Romanian chil
=dren who had spent at least 8 months (range
on intellectual development has been the re-
sult of the 1989 overthrow of the Ceausescu
8–53 months) in a Romanian orphanage (or
regime in Romania, after which the world be
phanage group) prior to their adoption to Can
came aware of thousands of children being
ada, when they were a median 18.5 months
=old (range8–68 months); 29 children who
housed in Romanian state-run orphanages.
would have gone to orphanage in Romania
had they not been adopted prior to 4 months
of age (early-adopted group); and 46 Cana
dian-born, nonadopted, never institutionalized
children (Canadian-born group) who were in
dividually matched on demographic charac
Shortly after the revolution, Kaler and
teristics to children in the orphanage group
Freeman (1994) were able to assess children
(Ames, 1997).
The second project (Rutter &
within the orphanage context. They conducted
the ERA Study Team, 1998) comprised a sam
cognitive assessments on 25 children ranging
ple of 165 children adopted to the United
in age from 23 to 50 months who resided in
Kingdom from Romania between birth and 42
a Romanian orphanage and compared them to
months of age. Most of the children, but not
same age peers from a Romanian kindergarten
all, had been adopted from orphanages. These
class. Apgar scores that were available for 13
children were compared to 52 children who
of the children indicated that they had normal
were adopted within the United Kingdom be
births. Using the Bayley Scales of Infant De
fore 6 months of age.
Page 6
The length of
time that children spent in the orphanage was
positively associated with the number of areas
of delay on the R-DPDQ and negatively cor
related with children’s scores on the adaptive,
personal–social, and language scales of the
Gesell. In addition to the length of time in an
institution, the availability of toys and having
been a favorite in the institution were associ
ated with fewer delays and higher scores on
the Gesell scales, whereas being described as
Morison et al. (1995) found that 78%
dirty when first met by parents was associated
of orphanage children were delayed in all four
with more delays and lower Gesell scores
areas of development (personal–social, gross
(Morison et al., 1995).
motor, fine motor–adaptive, and language de-
Three years postadoption these researchers
velopment) assessed by the Revised Denver
(Morison & Ellwood, 2000) evaluated chil
Prescreening Developmental Questionnaire (R-
dren’s intellectual development using the Stan
DPDQ; Frankenberg, 1986).
ford–Binet Intelligence Scale, Fourth Edition
(SB4: Thorndike, Hagen, & Sattler, 1986)
IQ results
were analyzed separately for orphanage chil
Rutter and his colleagues reported simi-
dren who had been adopted before and after
lar findings with their sample of adoptees in
they were 2 years old. In comparing IQ scores
the United Kingdom (Rutter & the ERA
among the younger children, who were 4.5
Study Team, 1998).
years old when assessed, Morison and Ell
y 11 months postadoption, improvement
wood (2000) found a clear ordering among
was evident in the Canadian sample (Morison
the groups, in which the Canadian-born group
=scored highest (M109), the early-adopted
et al., 1995).
y
=children scored in the middle (M99), and
=the orphanage children scored lower (M91)
The orphanage children adopted at later ages
(24–60 months old) had the lowest IQs of all
=(M68).
Le Mare, Vaughan, Warford, and Ferny
hough (2001) conducted a later follow-up of
the Canadian sample, when the children were
9.5 years old or older. The pattern of group
results remained consistent with the earlier
findings.
Not unlike their earlier performance on
the R-DPDQ, the scores of later-adopted chil
dren were lower across all scales of the SB4
(i.e., overall IQ, verbal comprehension, and
nonverbal reasoning) at both 3 years after
Page 7
adoption (Morison & Ellwood, 2000) and 8
years after adoption (Le Mare et al., 2001),
Rutter and colleagues used the General
Cognitive Index of the McCarthy Scales (Mc-
Carthy, 1972) and reported a similar ordering
among their groups of 4-year-old (Rutter &
the ERA Study Team, 1998) and 6-year-old
children (O’Connor, Rutter, Beckett, Keave
ney, Kreppner, & the ERA Study Team, 2000),
A study of
children reared in Greek orphanages in which
conditions were far superior to the conditions
found in Romania found lower academic per
formance among 9-year-old orphanage chil
dren compared to same gender and age peers
living at home (Vorria, Rutter, Pickles, Wol
The importance of length of institutional-
kind, & Hobsbaum, 1998)
ization for IQ is also supported by several re
ports of negative correlations between the two
= −.variables: r.75 3 years after adoption
= −.4(Morison & Ellwood, 2000), r48 at age
6 years (O’Connor, Rutter, Beckett, et al.,
= −.42000), and r44 at 8 or more years after
adoption (Le Mare et al., 2001).
In addition, 12%
of orphanage children adopted before 2 years
of age and 60% of orphanage children adopt
ed after 2 years of age had repeated a grade
Le Mare et al. (2001) con
cluded, however, that even though many or
phanage children were struggling within the
Page 8
school context, a noticeable number of them
were functioning well within the average
range academically.
Mori-
son and Ellwood (2000) found that not only
institutionalization but also the home environ
ment contributed to children’s IQ scores 3
years after adoption
Children’s home envi-
ronments were measured using the Home Ob-
servation for Measurement of the Environ
ment (HOME; Caldwell & Bradley, 1984)
Children do better if they are reared in better
quality institutions (e.g., those studied by Tiz
ard, 1977) or in institutions in which percep
tual or social environments have been enriched.
Page 9
previously institutionalized children
are typically small and malnourished after the
orphanage experience
. Eighty-five percent of
orphanage children in the Canadian sample
fell below the 10th percentile and 59% of chil
dren fell below the 5th percentile for weight
(Morison et al., 1995).
In another group of 16
Physical Development
Romanian children adopted to Canada, 50%
Dana Johnson and colleagues (Johnson et al.,
were below the 5th percentile for weight and
1992) examined the medical condition of 65
44% were below the 5th percentile for height
previously institutionalized Romanian children
(Benoit et al., 1996).
who were adopted to the United States.
They
Rutter and the
found that only 15% of these children were
ERA Study Team (1998) reported that half of
considered physically healthy at the time of
the children had heights, weights, and head
adoption.
Convergent evidence for this find
circumferences below the 3 percentile
ing comes from the Romanian children adopt
ed to Canada (Fisher et al., 1997). In this sam
ple, 85% of children had a reported medical
problem. Similarly, Hostetter, Iverson, Thomas,
McKenzie, Dole, and Johnson (1991) found
that at least one medical problem was re-
ported for a majority of children adopted from
growth retardation in height
15 countries in East and South Asia, Central
has been shown to be associated with the
and South America, Africa, and the Caribbean
length of time that children had spent in insti
and Pacific Islands. Fisher et al. (1997) found
tutions (Ames, 1997; Johnson et al., 1992
that according to their parents’ reports orphan-
Rutter & the ERA Study Team, 1998)
age children’s most common medical prob-
lems when they were first adopted were intes
tinal parasites (31% of children), hepatitis B
(28% of children), and anemia (15% of chil
dren). These medical problems are consistent
with those noted by other researchers who
The only physiological measures that have
have examined medical problems in previ-
been examined are cortisol levels (Carlson &
ously institutionalized children from Romania
Earls, 1997; Gunnar et al., 2001) and patterns
(Benoit, Jocelyn, Moddeman, & Embree, 1996;
of brain glucose metabolism (Chugani et al.,
Gyorkos & MacLean, 1992; Jenista, 1992;
2001).
Marcovitch, Cesaroni, Roberts, & Swanson,
1995) and from several other countries (Hoks-
bergen, 1981; Hostetter et al. 1991)
Page 10
This hypothesis is based on
substantial preclinical evidence that distur
bances in caregiving early in life alters devel
opment of the HPA axis and its central releas
ing hormone (Sanchez, Ladd, & Plotsky, 2001)
Both hy-
per- and hypocortisolemia can have negative
effects on health and behavioral functioning
(McEwen, 1998),
The first study to examine cortisol levels
Chugani and colleagues (2001) examined
among orphanage children was conducted by
brain dysfunction in ten 7- to 11-year-old
Carlson and Earls (1997). They measured am
children who had spent on average 38 months
bulatory cortisol levels in 2-year-old children
(range, 16–90 months) in a Romanian or
residing in a Romanian orphanage and com-
phanage prior to their adoption to the United
pared them to a sample of 2-year-old family
States.
reared children.
Carlson and Earls found that
orphanage children’s cortisol levels were not
elevated as compared to family-reared chil-
dren
Family-reared children displayed the
typical pattern: cortisol levels were highest in
the early morning and decreased over the day
Orphanage children, on the other hand, did
not display this pattern; indeed none of the
children they studied exhibited the typical di-
Chugani et al. (2001) found lower glucose
urnal pattern of cortisol production
Noon lev-
metabolism in several areas of the brain among
els of cortisol were positively correlated with
Romanian adoptees than in either the adult or
delays in cognitive functioning in the orphan
child comparison groups
They suggested that
age group.
Carlson and Earls (1997) sug-
the decreased brain glucose metabolism likely
gested that orphanage experience disturbs the
resulted from the Romanian adoptees’ experi
diurnal pattern of cortisol production but does
ence of early deprivation and may be one ex
not result in increased levels of cortisol con-
planation for the cognitive and behavioral def
centrations overall.
icits seen in many previously institutionalized
children. The reader is cautioned that early
deprivation in Chugani et al’s sample appears
to have included an unusually high frequency
of physical abuse.
Chugani et al. (2001) re
ported that 5 of the 10 Romanian children
they assessed had physical scarring that ap
Page 11
peared to have resulted from lacerations
that 11 months after adoption Romanian or
burns, or broken bones.
phanage children adopted to Canada had higher
internalizing and total scores on the Child Be
It is possible therefore
havior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach, Edel
that the brain dysfunction found by Chugani
brock, & Howell, 1987) than did early-adopted
et al. (2001) may be at least partially related
or Canadian-born children.
to pain and fear beyond the levels typical of
institutional life.
Children adopted after 6
months of age had higher externalizing and
total scores on the CBCL than Romanian chil
dren adopted before 6 months of age
Behavior Problems
Goldfarb
(1943b) found that previously institutional-
ized 6- to 8-year-old children who had been
placed in foster care at age 3 scored higher on
Although 3 years after adoption
behavior problem checklists than noninstitu-
the orphanage children no longer scored higher
tionalized children of the same age who had
than comparison groups on the internalizing
spent their lives in foster care
The same dif
scale of the CBCL, they continued to score
ference between these groups was also found
higher on the same internalizing items on which
during adolescence (Goldfarb, 1943a)
Even
they had scored higher at 11 months post
children who were adopted from the relatively
adoption, that is, stares into space, strange be
benign orphanage environment studied by
havior, acts too young, and speech problems
Tizard were described by their teachers as
having more behavior problems than their
classmates at both 8 (Tizard, 1977) and 16
years old (Hodges & Tizard, 1989).
Verhulst,
Althaus, and Versluis–Den Bieman (1990a,
1990b) found that 10- to 15-year-old children
who had been adopted from other countries to
the Netherlands between birth and 10 years of
age had more behavior problems than same
age nonadopted children.
Fisher et al. (1997) found
Page 12
In the Canadian sample, research
Three
ers conducted in-depth interviews with par
years after adoption, orphanage children had
ents regarding any behavior problems they
no more eating problems than did Canadian
were experiencing with their children at or
born or early-adopted children (Ames, 1997).
soon after adoption (Fisher et al., 1997). The
A common behavior problem found in
main areas of problematic behavior were eat
most samples of orphanage children is stereo
ing, stereotyped behavior, and peer relation
typed behavior, that is, repeating the same
ships. Eleven months after adoption 65% of
movement over and over, as in body rocking
orphanage children had eating problems: par-
ents reported that one-third of children re
fused to eat solid foods and almost one-third
of children overate.
Sixty-seven percent of children rocked
and 19% moved their hands stereotypically.
Fisher et al. (1997) sug
gested that the stereotyped behavior of or
phanage children may represent the prolonga
tion of the stereotyped behaviors found in
normal infants around the time they learn to
sit, stand, or walk (Thelan, 1979, 1981). I
may also reflect a self-soothing strategy or an
attempt to self-stimulate in the barren orphan
age rooms.
In the Canadian sample, stereotyped be
havior was the most frequently reported be
havior problem of orphanage children but it
was also a behavior that improved quite rap
idly (Fisher et al., 1997).
In the Canadian
sample, many parents of orphanage children
reported that they continued to offer food to
children after a meal and that it was never
refused. Given orphanage children’s malnutri
tion and small size, such overeating probably
represents their bodies’ natural catch-up mech-
anism.
Children in orphanage had never eaten
enough food to allow them to learn feelings
of satiety (Fisher et al., 1997).
Page 13
from orphanage to foster care at age 3.
Chu
gani et al. (2001) found that ten 7- to 11-year
old children adopted from Romanian orphan
Fisher et al. (1997) found
ages scored on standardized tests in the mildly
that 32% of orphanage children had problems
impaired range on attention and in the se
with peers. The most common problems in
verely impaired range on impulsivity.
volved either avoiding contact with peers or
At 3 years postadoption, orphanage children
being overwhelmed by peers’ attention,
in the Canadian sample scored higher than
comparison group children on the Attention
Problems subscale of the CBCL (Ames, 1997).
They were also reported by their parents ac
cording to the Parenting Stress Index (Abidin
1990) to be more distractible but not more hy
peractive on the Distractibility/Hyperactivity
subscale than comparison group children at
By the time the
11 months after adoption (Mainemer, Gilman
orphanage children had been in Canada for 8
& Ames, 1998) and more distractible and hy
or more years, their peer relationships had im-
peractive than comparison children 3 years af
proved (Warford, 2002).
ter adoption (Ames, 1997).
Kreppner, O’Connor, and Rutter
(2001) found that at both 4 and 6 years of
age the children who had been adopted from
Romania after 6 months of age were rated by
both teachers and parents on the Revised Rut
ter Parent and Teacher scales (Hogg, Rut
orphanage
ter, & Richman, 1997) as displaying higher
children felt less social support from their
inattention/overactivity than did Romanian
peer group or a close friend than did children
children or U.K. children who were adopted
in the other groups. The longer children had
before 6 months of age.
spent in institution, the less peer support they
The Canadian adoptees from Romania con
felt.
tinued to display more attention problems 8 or
more years after adoption (Le Mare & Audet
2002): orphanage children scored higher than
both Canadian-born and early-adopted children
on the Attention subscale of the CBCL and
Vorria, Rutter, Pickles, Wolkind, and Hobs
on the Impulsivity and Inhibitory Control sub
baum (1998) found that, compared to same
scales of the Children’s Behavior Question
aged peers living at home, 9- to 11-year-old
naire (Ahadi, Rothbart, & Ye, 1993) and lower
children living in a Greek orphanage were more
on the questionnaire’s Attention Focusing sub
inattentive and more often engaged in nonpro-
scale.
ductive activities in the classroom.
29%
of children in the orphanage group had re
high activity
ceived a clinical diagnosis of attention-deficit
levels, inability to attend, and distractibility as
disorder (ADD) or attention-deficit/hyperac
ongoing problems
tivity disorder (ADHD) whereas none of the
These findings are consis
comparison group children had received such
tent with the earlier work of Goldfarb (1945b
a diagnosis (Le Mare & Audet, 2002).
who reported distractibility and a lack of con-
centration among adolescents who had moved
Page 14
Le Mare
and Audet (2002) found that children’s atten
Peer problems are also believed to arise
tional difficulties at 8 years of age were nega
from the characteristics of the orphanage en
tively correlated with their HOME environ-
vironment.
Young children in Romanian o
ment scores (Caldwell & Bradley, 1984)
phanages are generally quiet and unrespon
sive to each other, so after adoption they are
wary of and withdraw from family-reared chil
dren who are noisier, more active, and more
unpredictable than their peers in the orphan
age (Fisher et al., 1997). This unwillingness
to interact with peers further prevents them
from learning normal patterns of social inter
action. When they do become comfortable
enough to interact with peers in their new en
vironment, they externalize (“act out”) in u
acceptable ways that do not endear them to
those peers.
Several years after adoption, they
some behavior problems last
have improved on most indices of behavior
up to 8 or more years after removal from the
with peers but still have externalizing prob
institution.
Fisher et al. (1997) have pointed
lems and feel less social support from peers or
out that most of the characteristic early prob-
a close friend than family-reared children do.
lems of children adopted from orphanages
problems in attending may be at least
might indicate brain damage or emotionally
partly explained by the abrupt move from the
produced pathology if they were found in
very low levels of stimulation in the orphan
children reared in families. In orphanage chil
age to the overwhelming sensory stimulation
dren, however, they seem more correctly
of an adoptive home without any opportunity
characterized as behavioral adaptations to o
to gradually learn how to deal with greater
phanage life.
Children who have had inade
sensory complexity
quate nutrition in orphanage initially overeat
until they reach the proper weight. Children
who have been fed entirely by bottle for the
first 2 years of life resist solid food when it is
introduced for the first time. Young orphan
age children show the same stereotyped be-
haviors as family-reared children just starting
to sit, stand, or walk (Thelen, 1979), but when
Indiscriminate Friendliness
restriction to a crib for 18–20 hr/day does
not permit them to develop their motor skills
(Ames, 1997), these early stereotyped behav
iors are practiced for a prolonged period
Tizard
the general absence of sensory stimulation
(1977) characterized indiscriminate friendli
and soothing by adults, for example, by rock-
ness as behavior that is affectionate and
ing, children may learn to provide their own
friendly toward all adults (including strang
stimulation or soothing by making stereo
ers) without the fear or caution that is typical
typed movements.
in young children. In these cases the chil
dren’s behavior toward a stranger cannot be
discriminated from their behavior toward their
primary caregivers
Page 15
Using
a scale of “disinhibited attachment distur
bance,” which contained three items similar
to those used by Chisholm (1998; Chisholm
et al., 1995), O’Connor et al. (1999) found
that approximately 20% of Romanian children
adopted between 6 and 24 months of age had
high scores on the scale compared to approxi
mately 10% of Romanian children adopted
before 6 months of age and 2% of a group of
children adopted within the United Kingdom
(Hodges & Tizard
1989). Goldfarb (1955) found that indiscrimi
nate friendliness was still present in adoles-
cents who had been institutionalized as chil-
dren but who were later fostered to unstable
foster care placements
Chisholm (1998; Chisholm et al., 1995)
developed a 5-item measure of indiscriminate
friendliness. Parents were asked five questions
assessing (a) whether their child wandered
without distress, (b) whether their child was
willing to go home with a stranger, (c) how
friendly their child was with new adults, (d)
whether their child was ever shy, and (e) what
their child typically did upon meeting new
adults
Unlike the findings for intellectual devel
opment and for other behavior problems, there
Page 16
is disagreement among studies as to whether
children’s scores on indiscriminate friendliness
there is a relationship between the length of
at 3 years after adoption were positively cor
time that children have spent in orphanages
related with their attention problem scores more
(or their age at adoption) and the amount of
than 8 years after adoption.
indiscriminate friendliness they display. O’Con-
in the U.K. sample
nor and his colleagues found modest correla
children’s scores on disinhibited attachment
tions at both 4 years (O’Connor, et al., 1999)
disturbance were positively correlated with
and 6 years of age (O’Connor, Rutter, et al.,
their scores on hyperactivity and disruptive
2000) between duration of deprivation (age at
behavior measures at age 4
adoption) and children’s scores on disinhib-
and hyperactivity, disruptive behavior,
ited attachment behaviors in the U.K. group.
and emotional difficulties measures at 6 years
They pointed out, however, that some chil
dren who were adopted after 2 years in Roma-
In contrast to behavior problems, IQ does
nia showed no signs of disinhibited attach-
not appear to be strongly related to indiscrimi
ment behaviors and other children who were
nate friendliness
adopted within the first 6 months of life showed
signs of the behavior
In an attempt to better understand indis
criminate friendliness, researchers have exam
ined particular correlates that may be associ
ated with this behavior, focusing on aspects
of the institutional environment, child charac-
teristics, and family characteristics. In the Ca-
nadian sample Chisholm (1998) found that
high scores on indiscriminate friendliness 3
years postadoption were positively correlated
with the child having been a favorite in the
institution. Other measures of the quality of
. Unlike
institutions, for example, quality of physical
many of the initial behaviors of concern in
care, whether toys were available (Chisholm
institutionalized children, displays of indis
et al. 1998), or children’s weight or develop
criminate friendliness do not appear to dissi
mental delay at adoption (O’Connor et al
pate over time but are still in evidence up to 8
1999; O’Connor, Rutter, et al., 2000) were
years after leaving the orphanage environment
unrelated to children’s indiscriminate friendli-
(Fernyhough et al., 2002; O’Connor, Rutter,
ness.
et al., 2000) and may persist even longer
(Goldfarb, 1955).
Chisholm (1998) has sug
gested that indiscriminate friendliness may
Researchers have
serve an adaptive function in the context of
consistently found associations between or-
the orphanage environment where emotional
phanage children’s indiscriminate friendliness
resources are extremely limited. Amid th
and their behavior problems. Chisholm (1998)
passivity of the orphanage an indiscriminately
found that at 3 years postadoption, children’s
friendly child may receive what little attention
indiscriminate friendliness scores were posi
caregivers have to offer
The fact that indis
tively correlated with their scores on the
criminate friendliness was associated with hav
CBCL.
Le Mare and Audet (2002) found that
ing been a favorite in the orphanage supports
Page 17
this contention but does not explain what
function such behavior serves after adoption.
Similarly, O’Connor et al. (2003)
reported that children in their sample who
scored high on their Disinhibited Attachment
Disturbance scale were overwhelmingly clas
sified as Insecure/Other in terms of their at
tachment patterns
Both Chisholm (1998) and O’Connor et al.
(2003) found some securely attached children
O’Connor et al
who are indiscriminately friendly, and Mar
(1999) also suggested that indiscriminate friend-
covitch et al. (1997) reported that some se
liness may represent a form of developmental
curely attached children were observed to be ex
delay in the attachment behavioral system, al
tremely friendly to the stranger in the Strange
though their use of the term “disinhibited at
Situation. It seems unlikely, therefore, that in
tachment disturbance” seems to suggest atten
discriminate friendliness necessarily indicates
tion problems as well as involvement of the
an attachment disorder (Chisholm, 1998).
attachment system.
Indiscriminate friendliness is particularly
relevant to the study of attachment, given sug-
gestions that this behavior may be indicative
of “nonattachment” (Lieberman & Pawl, 1988)
or the disinhibited/indiscriminate subtype of
reactive attachment disorder (Zeanah, 1996,
2000). Both Lieberman and Pawl (1988) and
Zeanah (2000) described these disorders as re-
sulting from an infant not having had the op-
portunity to form an attachment relationship
Indiscriminate friendliness has little or no
relation to IQ, but it is positively correlated
with behavior problems, especially problems
of attention. To some extent, therefore, it may
reflect distractibility and impulsivity as ap
plied to interactions with strange adults.
Page 18
vided one-on-one attention to children.
a possible differentiation of two compo
By the time the children
nents of indiscriminate friendliness: uninhib-
were 8 years old there were only 7 institution
ited friendliness toward all adults and lack of
children left to study and only a minority of
the secure base behavior characteristic of at-
them were suspected to have formed any at
tachment.
tachment to their institutional caregiver.
Attachment
Given that at-
tachment usually develops some time during
the second half of the first year of life (Bowl-
by, 1969/1982) children who have been housed
in institutions during the first year or 2 of life
necessarily develop an attachment relation
hip with adoptive parents later than is typi-
cal
most researchers have assumed that the
children would have been unlikely to have de
veloped an attachment relationship with care
givers within the institution, given the very
high child to caregiver ratios within institu
tions (Chisholm, 1998).
Chisholm
Tizard has been the only researcher who
et al. (1995) also reported that children from
examined children’s behavior toward their
institutions did not initially display proximity
caregivers within the institution context. Tiz-
promoting behaviors like smiling, crying, and
ard and Tizard (1971) found that when com
making eye contact, behaviors that often pro
paring children in institution to family-reared
mote contact with caregivers
Parents in the
2-year-olds, a list of preferred persons could
Canadian sample reported that when they first
easily be constructed for family-reared chil
met their children fewer than half of the chil
dren whereas lists of preferred persons for
dren would smile back at someone who smiled
children from institutions included anyone
at them.
that children knew well. The only “favorite
people in children’s lives were people they
saw rarely (i.e., a parent who visited), but
such persons were the only ones who pro
Page 19
ports whether children had truly been unable
to form an initial attachment with caregivers
in the institution. Tizard and Rees (1975) re
ported that even though the institutions main
tained a policy that discouraged caregivers from
forming relationships with particular children
there were some indications that children did
have preferences among their regular caregiv
ers. Perhaps most important, there was a radi
cal difference between the two studies in terms
of the stability of placement for the children
postinstitutionalization.
Children in Goldfarb’s
study very often went to unstable foster care
placements. By the time children were be
Goldfarb
tween 10 and 14 years of age they had experi
(1943a) found that the majority of 10- to 14-
enced care in three or four different foster
year-olds who had been in orphanage for the
homes (Goldfarb, 1943a). It is likely that hav
first 3 years of life and were later removed to
ing experienced a series of broken attachment
foster homes were described as withdrawn and
relationships contributed to children’s emo-
“removed” with both family members and their
tional coldness.
Children in Tizard’s sample
caseworkers, and appeared unperturbed by ei-
however, went to stable adoptive homes
ther threats of removal from the home or
changes in foster care placements (Goldfarb
1945b).
Goldfarb concluded that
researchers have examined
orphanage children were unable to develop at-
attachment in previously institutionalized chil
tachment relationships with their foster par-
dren using standard separation reunion proce
ents and that the effects of institutionalization
dures and relying on validated attachment
were permanent. In contrast to Goldfarb’s work,
coding systems (Chisholm, 1998; Marcovitch
Tizard (1977) concluded that children could
et al., 1997; O’Connor et al., 2003).
become attached to parents after leaving an
researchers used a separation
institution. In her sample, 20 of 25 children
reunion procedure with preschool-aged chil
were reported to have formed an attachment
dren in which children first interacted with
relationship with their adoptive parents within
their mothers in play, stayed in the same room
a year of leaving the institution and a majority
with a stranger while their mother left, and
of parents reported that their child was deeply
then were reunited with their mothers
attached to them.
Children in Gold-
farb’s sample were delayed in every area of
Chis
development. In contrast, children in Tizard’s
holm (1998) used Crittenden’s (1992a) Pre
sample were chosen for good health and had
school Assessment of Attachment (PAA) to
average IQs when they left the institution
code preschool attachment patterns, whereas
(Tizard, Cooperman, Joseph, & Tizard, 1972)
both Marcovitch et al. (1997) and O’Connor
These factors would bode well for the forma
et al. (2003) used the Cassidy, Marvin, and
tion of an attachment relationship with par-
MacArthur Working Group (1992) Preschool
ents. Second, it is unclear from Tizard’s re
Attachment System
Page 20
Chisholm (1998) found that, com
pared to orphanage children classified as se-
cure, those who were classified as insecure
had lower IQs, more behavior problems, par-
ents who reported higher levels of parenting
stress, and lower socioeconomic status back-
ground
Page 21
Orphanage children in the Canadian sam
ple also displayed a higher percentage of com
pulsive caregiving (A3), a pattern more com
monly seen in neglected samples than in abused
samples of children (Crittenden & Claussen
2000)
The compulsive caregiving pattern is adopted
in response to a withdrawn or unresponsive
caregiver. A child displaying an A3 pattern
inhibits negative affect and attempts to cheer
an unresponsive caregiver with overbrightness
and nurturance (Crittenden, 1992a).
The distribution of atypical patterns in pre-
viously institutionalized children is not the
same as in other maltreated samples. One dif
ference is that orphanage samples display a
lower percentage of the Defended/Coercive
(A/C) insecure pattern than do other maltreated
samples. A child classified as A/C shifts back
and forth between defended and coercive strat-
egies in response to the behavior of an often
unpredictable caregiver
the Insecure
(other) pattern is more common in orphanage
samples than in maltreated samples. Insecure
(other), by definition indicates behavior that
is difficult to classify. This classification is
given when a child is clearly insecure, but th
strategy that he or she uses in interaction does
not fit any of the established insecure pat
terns.
Page 22
Chisholm (1996)
concluded that Secure (other) children were
more similar to children classified as secure
Such atypicality in orphanage children’s
than to children classified as Insecure (other
attachment was also apparent in the attach-
This suggests that the PAA is able to classify
ment patterns of orphanage children classified
children appropriately as secure and insecure
as secure. The PAA (Crittenden, 1992a) has a
and yet reveals that orphanage children may
secure classification labeled “Secure (other).”
display even secure patterns of attachment dif
This classification is given when children are
ferently from both normal samples and nonin
clearly secure but the strategies they use in
stitutional, high-risk samples of children
interaction with their caregiver do not reflect
any of the standard subpatterns of secure.
This finding suggested the possibility that
the coding systems that were developed using
normative samples of children were inade
quate to evaluate attachment in institution
ized samples, that is, that children classified
as Secure (other) might not truly be secure
Chisholm (1996) compared Secure (other) chil-
dren to both the remaining secure children
to children classified as Insecure (other) to
find out which of these groups they resembled
more. (
Secure (other) children did not
differ from secure orphanage children on be
havior problems, parenting stress, or indiscrim-
inate friendliness, but they did have lower IQs
than secure orphanage children
Page 23
Tizard and Hodges (1978), who did not
find a relationship between whether a parent
considered his or her child to be attached at 8
years of age and the length of time the child
had spent in institution: the majority of chil
dren who had spent at least 4.5 years in insti
tution were reported to be closely attached to
their parent at 8 years of age
it remains unclear
whether there is a length of time beyo
which developing a secure attachment rela
tionship may become impossible. Bowlby ini
tially claimed that if the opportunity to form
an attachment was delayed until after the age
of 2.5 years, it was “almost useless” (Bowlby,
1953), thereby implying a short window of
opportunity for developing attachment
By
1973, he claimed that the sensitive period for
attachment likely extended through the de
cade beyond a child’s fifth birthday, but that
such development would become increasingly
more difficult as a child grew older. This was
in line with a more modern emphasis on risk
and resilience in a probabilistic, rather than
deterministic, model of development (Rutter
& O’Connor, 1999).
In a reanalysis of the Chisholm
(1998) data, Ames and Chisholm (2001) found
that the median and ranges of length of insti
tutionalization were 16.5 (range = 9–39 months)
for orphanage children subsequently classified
as secure; 14 (range = 9–53) months for chil
dren classified as typical insecure; and 21
(range = 8–53) months for children classified
as atypical insecure.
These differences were
not statistically significant, but it is important
to note that the oldest children who had de
Page 24
veloped a secure attachment relationship with
these children scored above the clinical cutoff
an adoptive parent had spent only 39 months
on behavior problems, and three of the four
in an orphanage
In this sample there were
for whom parenting stress scores were avail
only 5 children who had spent more than 39
able had higher than average parenting stress
months in an orphanage
scores for the orphanage group.
It is clear that on the basis of
5 children no firm conclusions can be drawn
Therefore,
concerning the end of a sensitive period for
rather than assume that length of institutional
the development of a first attachment.
ization per se explains their lack of secure at
tachment, it appears more reasonable to sug
gest that they were adopted into families in
which the resources were not sufficient to
allow parents to provide children who had
many problems with the high level of sensi
tive responsiveness that would be required to
develop a secure attachment.
Children with lower IQs (Chisholm
1998; Tizard & Hodges, 1978) and more be-
havior problems (Chisholm, 1998; Marcovitch
et al., 1997) have more difficulty forming at-
tachment relationships with their adoptive par-
ents, most likely because these factors in-
Between 2 and 4 years of age, 24 of the chil
terfere with parents’ ability to be sensitively
dren were adopted out of institution and 15
responsive to their children
children were restored to their natural fami
lies. In comparing the adoptive and restored
groups of children, Tizard and Hodges (1978)
found that whereas 84% of adoptive mothers
felt that their child was deeply attached to
them, only 54% of mothers of restored chil
dren felt this was the case.
Children in the
restored group were reunited with their bio
logical mothers who often were ambivalent or
reluctant to have their child return home.
restored children typically were returned to
families who had a larger number of children
(Tizard & Hodges, 1978), whose mothers were
younger and whose fathers had jobs of a
lower socioeconomic status (Tizard & Rees
1974).
Parents of restored children also spent
These factors may help to explain the inse-
less time in play and educational activities
cure attachments of the oldest five children in
with their children than parents in the adop
the Ames and Chisholm (2001) reanalysis. All
tive group (Hodges & Tizard, 1989).
five of these children had IQ scores lower
than 85, and four of the five came from fami-
Tiz
lies whose income was lower than the average
ard and Hodges (1978) concluded that form
for the orphanage group as a whole.
Three of
ing a secure attachment relationship did not
Page 25
so much depend on institutionalization as on
the “willingness of the new parents to accept
a dependent relationship and to put a lot of
time and effort into developing it”
We do not
yet know whether the period during which at
tachment is possible might be extended through
adolescence, as Bowlby (1988) has suggested
or whether there is an earlier time after which
the development of attachment becomes im
possible.
Page 27
Given the profound general deprivation that
often characterizes orphanages, researchers
have been unable to specify which aspects of
deprivation caused the outcomes that have
been found.
The only exception is Tizard’s
work (1977) with orphanage children in the
United Kingdom, who experienced only so
cial emotional deprivation but were well cared
for otherwise
We know from this work that
providing good nutrition and cognitive stim
ulation can prevent developmental delays.
These same children, however, still displayed
indiscriminate friendliness and some difficul
ties in attachment, which seem attributable to
the limitation of not having had a close per
sonal relationship with an adult caregiver.
Page 28
There are presently two interven-
tion studies ongoing in Eastern Europe. The
Bucharest Early Intervention Project (Koga,
Smyke, Zeanah, 2003; Zeanah, Smyke, & Koga,
2003) has begun providing a foster care inter-
vention in Bucharest, Romania, in which they
are following the development of children re
Children in Eastern Euro
moved from orphanage to foster care and com-
pean orphanages are typically housed in age
paring their developmental progress to both
segregated groups, a policy that hinders cog
children who remain in orphanage and a com-
nitive growth.
munity comparison group.
The St. Petersburg–
U.S.A. Orphanage Project (McCall, Muha-
medrahimov, Groark, Palmov, & Nikiforova,
2003), operating in three baby homes in St.
Petersburg, is providing different interven-
tions to examine which are most effective in
reducing the developmental impact of institu-
tional rearing.
In one baby home, orphanage
staff are being trained in child development
and sensitive responsiveness. In a second,
both caregiver training and structural changes
that reduce the number of different caregivers
and increase their stability in the lives of the
children are being implemented. A third baby
home is serving as a “no intervention” com-
parison group.
Page 29
Research on institutionalized children has
shown that similar experiences early in life may
result in a variety of outcomes, a phenomenon
that Cicchetti (1996) has termed multifinality.
Abidin, R. R. (1990). Parenting Stress Index (3rd Ed.)
Charlottesville, VA: Pediatric Psychology Press.
Achenbach, T. W., Edelbrock, C., & Howell, C. T. (1987).
Empirically based assessment of the behavioral/emo
tional problems of 2–3-year-old children. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 15, 629–650.
y of the Strange Situation. Hillsdale,
Ames, E. W. (1997). Development of Romanian orphan
Broussard, M., & DeCarie, T. G. (1971). The effects of
three kinds of perceptual-social stimulation on the d
, E. W. (1997). Development of Romanian orp
age children adopted to Canada. Final Report to the
three kinds of perceptual-social stimulation on the delopment of institutionalized children: Prelimi
velopment of institutionalized children: Preliminary
Human Resources Development Office, Ottawa, Can
Hum
ada
report of a longitudinal study. Early Child Developd Care, 1, 111–130
ment and Care, 1, 111–130.
Ames, E. W., & Chisholm, K. (2001). Social and emo
Caldwell, B. M., & Bradley, R. H. (1984). Home obser
tional development in children adopted from institu
vation for measurement of the environment. Unpub
tions. In D. B. Bailey, Jr., J. T. Bruer, F. J. Symons, &
lished manuscript, University of Arkansas at Little
J. W. Lichtman (Eds.), Critical thinking about critical
ds (pp. 129–148). Baltimore, MD: Brook
lished
Rock.
periods (pp. 129–148). Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
ley, N. (1969). The Bayley Scales of Infant D
Bayley, N. (1969). The Bayley Scales of Infant Develop-
t: Birth to two years. San Antonio, TX: Psych
ment: Birth to two years. San Antonio, TX: Psycho-
logical Corporati
logical Corporation
kett, C., Bredenk
Beckett, C., Bredenkamp, D., Castle, J., Groothues, C.,
O’Connor, T.G., Rutter, M., & the English and R
O’Connor, T.G., Rutter, M., & the English and Roma
nian Adoptees Study Team. (2002). Behavior prob
lems associated with institutional deprivation: A study
of children adopted from Romania. Journal of Devel-
opmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 23, 297–303.
Carlson, V., Cicchetti, D., Barnett, D., & Braunwald, K.
(1989). Finding order in disorganization: Lessons
from research on maltreated infants’ attachments to
their caregivers. In D. Cicchetti & V. Carlson (Eds.),
Page 30
Frankenberg, W. K. (1986, May). Revised Denver Pre-
creening Developmental Questionnaire.
Goldfarb, W. (1943a). The effects of early institutional
care on adolescent personality. Journal of Experimen
tal Education, 12, 106–129.
Page 31
Hunt, J. M., Mohandessi, K., Ghodessi, M., & Akiyama,
M. (1976). The psychological development of or-
phanage-reared infants: Interventions with outcomes
(Tehran). Genetic Psychological Monographs, 94,
177–226
McCarthy, D. (1972). The McCarthy Scales of Children’s
Abilities
Kreppner, J. M., O’Connor, T. G., & Rutter, M. (2001)
Can inattention/overactivity be an institutional depri
vation syndrome? Journal of Abnormal Child Psy-
chology, 29, 513–528.
Ripley, M. (1992, August). Summary of comments made
by adoptive parents of Bulgarian orphanage children.
Rutter, M., & O’Connor, T. G. (1999). Implications of
attachment theory for child care policies. In J. Cas
Mainemer, H., Gilman, L. C., & Ames, E. W. (1998).
sidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment:
Parenting stress in families adopting children from
Theory, research, and clinical applications (pp. 823–
Romanian orphanages. Journal of Family Issues, 19,
844). New York: Guilford Press.
164–180.
Page 32
Sloutsky, V. M. (1997). Institutional care and develop-
mental outcomes of 6-and7-year old children: A con-
textual perspective. International Journal of Behav-
ioral Development, 20, 131–151
Vorria, P., Rutter, M., Pickles, A., Wolkind, S., & Hobs
baum, A. (1998). A comparative study of Greek chil
dren in long-term residential care and in two-parent
families: I. Social, emotional, and behavioral differ
ences.
Thorndike, R. L., Hagen, E. P., & Sattler, J. M. (1986)
Manual for the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale (4th
ed.). Chicago: Riverside
Tizard, B., Cooperman, O., Joseph, A., & Tizard, J
(1972). Environmental effects on language develop
ment: A study of young children in long-stay residen-
tial nurseries. Child Development, 43, 337–358
